---
title: How to Read
---

I've been told the rate and retention I have while reading is abnormal to say
the least.  Others have been interested in trying my reading methodology and
seeing if it would help them read better.  As a result, I've been making an
attempt to codify how I read so that others can try it for themselves.

The first idiosyncracy to my methodology is the concurrency I utilize while
reading books.  Since college I've always read around five to ten books
concurrently.  Generally, this is received with awe and intrigue about how I'm
able to keep them separate or retain any number of them let alone one.

What I've found over the years is that by reducing the amount of information
consumed on a topic in a given sitting, it increases the ability to let that
knowledge settle into long-term memory (references).  Thus, one of the ways to
increase concurrency is to read a section or chapter of one book and then read a
section or chapter of the next and repeat until done reading for the session.

I couple short reading bursts of an individual book with practised recall before
continuing a book I read in a previous session.  By re-establishing reading
context without re-reading the previous section before continuing a book, I
ensure that I can keep the contents of a book relevant to some mnemonic.
Usually the author, title, or cover if not all three.

The second idiosyncracy to my methodoloy is the way I sort my books and order my
reading.  I sort books I am currently reading by a quality I've been calling
readability.  Loosely readability is a multiple of the approximate word density,
age (time since added to the reading list), and completion.  This sorts my
reading stack by how quickly I will finish books.  I add age to ensure that
books aren't stuck at the bottom of the stack forever.

Formally, I currently define readability as:

```
(Area of Page * Pages Remaining) / (Font Size * Completion Percentage * Age)
```
