---
title: How I Read
---

I've been told the rate and retention I have while reading is abnormal to say
the least.  Others have been interested in trying my reading methodology and
seeing if it would help them comprehend and retain more of what they read.  As a
result, I've been making an attempt to codify how I read so that others can try
it for themselves.

Since college I've always read around five to ten books concurrently.
Generally, this is received with awe and intrigue about how I'm able to keep
them separate or retain any number of them let alone one.

Over the years I've found that reducing the amount of information consumed on a
topic in a given sitting increases the ability to let that knowledge settle into
long-term memory (references).  Thus, one of the ways to increase concurrency is
to read a section or chapter of one book and then read a section or chapter of
the next and repeat until done reading for the session.

Simply putâ€”I couple short reading bursts of an individual book with practised
recall before continuing a book I read in a previous session.  For example, in
one session I might read "Type-Driven Development with Idris", "The Thirteen
Books of the Elements", and "Abstract Algebra".  In my next reading session, I
would take a moment before starting to recall the section or chapter I
previously read of "Type-Driven Development with Idris".  Then I would read the
next section or chapter before doing the same recall and reading of "The
Thirteen Books of the Elements".

By re-establishing reading context without re-reading the previous section
before continuing a book, I ensure that I can keep the contents of a book
relevant to some mnemonic (e.g., author, title, or cover).

The second idiosyncracy to my methodoloy is the way I sort my books and order my
reading.  I sort books I am currently reading by a quality I've been calling
readability.  Loosely, readability is a multiple of the approximate word density,
age (time since added to the reading list), and completion.  This sorts my
reading stack by how quickly I will finish books.  I add age to ensure that
books aren't stuck at the bottom of the stack forever.

Formally, I currently define readability as:

```
(Area of Page * Pages Remaining) / (Font Size * Completion Percentage * Age)
```

I hope this method provides an alternative mindset for reading and allows more
people to read more of the things they want to.  If you have any feedback on the
method or would like to share your experience, please reach out to me on one of
my various communication channels.  The easiest would probably to start a small
discussion on twitter and escalate as necessary.
